So let's date let's move on to effect for
use effect.
So you can see here,
this is just a clock at the moment, right?
It's just counting up.
It's currently 10:21AM here
in kind of hazy gray Minneapolis.
So let's go over what
this is actually doing.
It's using state, so
we're using new state again.
And then it's just creating the current
date here as the initial state.
And then it's doing a timer here,
which is a set timeout.
And it's setting the time so
it's calling the set time on use state
with the new date every one second,
right, so basically it's just
advancing the clock every second.
Okay we'll talk about this in just
a second ignore that line but
that's what use effect is doing is is
basically creating a side effect for
your particular component, right?
We couldn't do this inside of the render
because we want this to be scheduled
outside of the rendering cycle.
And then every time that we
call set time from use to here,
react knows, something has changed.
I need to rerender.
So that's what it's doing here.
Every second it's re rendering the clock
so you could do things like make this
like render faster than that which
would be pointless because this isn't
always going to change or
we can make it change slower than that so
you can see it'll start
skipping numbers here.
Okay, and then we're here down,
the component is actually just
returning time to local time string,
which is just like a date function
built into JavaScript, right?
Which is where it's getting
the 10:23AM formatted string.
Okay so, Before I talk about
this line does anyone have any questions
about what use effect is doing.
This is basically where you wanna
do things that are outside of like
your normal render cycle.
So if you're coming from like
an older version of React,
this is where you want to do
like component did mount things,
component will unmount,
component did unmount,
those kinds of things are gonna be kind
of located inside of Effects right?
Which is what that use effect
function here is doing.,
Okay, and then something else
this using effect is doing,
is you notice that it keeps getting
run over and over again, right?
It's getting run every second.
Why is that?
Well actually didn't give it any
dependencies so basically anytime any
of the hook data changes in this it's
going to schedule itself again, right?
As opposed if I give it this notice
is actually going to stop counting
because this means it's gonna run
once now keep in mind that anytime
that I type in this code sandbox
automatically restarts everything so
if I just start putting something in here
notice it will update Right, and that's
just because code sandbox is runs it
every time that I type something in here.
So that's what this is doing this
is a an array of dependencies.
Now if I put time back in here,
this will start updating again, why?
Because now it is updating
every time that time updates,
which is every second, right?
Which is why this is keeps getting
rounding every single second but
if I put like set time in here,
set time is not changing.
It's just a function right?
So this then stops updating again.
So actually the better way to write this
would be time because this has an explicit
dependency on time.
If I then later go back and
add more hooks,
it'll still only be dependent on time.
So it's better to be explicit
with your dependencies right or
when you want this effect to run again.
Because if I just leave it off,
it's implicitly saying run this whenever
anything changes, which works for
this because I just have one other use
state hook in this but if I ever expanded
the scope of this then it would work
differently which could be bad.
Okay let's talk about line eight here
whenever you're running a Timer right so
you're basically scheduling yourself
to run a second in the future
what happens if I unmount the component
in the middle of that this
this timer is still scheduler is
still going to run in the future.
So clear timeout allows you to just take
in whatever the result of set timeout is
set timeout gives you back a number
that corresponds to the timer
that you're actually running so
if you actually look at.
Console.log timer.
I think this just ends
up being a number right?
It is right.
So this is just a number
that's getting put out here.
But if I say clear timeout with
the correct timer number here,
it'll prevent the timer that
I scheduled from running.
In other words, this function here that
you return at the end of an effect Is what
gets run to clean up the component.
So if I later go and unmounts the effect
component, which you can see my code base,
I actually don't.
So it's kind of unnecessary, but if I did,
I would want to clear that timeouts so
that I was not calling set time when
this component went out of scope.
Now is it a big deal if
it actually does run?
No it's not going to really change that
much but imagine if you were doing maybe
heavy computations or something like that
and you wanted to cancel that because you
unmounted the component and
that computation is no longer effective.
Or maybe you have like some components
making like a sequence of API requests and
you want to like interrupt that sequence
right there's a bunch of reasons why you'd
want to clean that up or
another good reason.
Let's say I had to write a component
to connect react to a jQuery like,
I don't know, like date picker or
something like that, right?
The way you would do that is you'd
actually control that here and
then from an effect, whenever you
had to unmount that component,
you'd use that to clean up your jQuery,
right?
Otherwise you're gonna get memory leaks.
99 times out of 100 that's even
go with 999 times out of 100.
You're doing this so
you don't have memory leaks, right?
That's what most of this like returned
function is cleanup stuff is for
It's to prevent memory leaks.
Kind of an advanced use case but you
chose to watch intermediate react not me.
[LAUGH] Any questions?
>> Is that comment specific
to the use effect hook then?
>> Yes.
>> Is the only the clock we rendered or
the whole page?
>> Only, so React is really intelligent
about what it chooses to rerender.
So in this particular case it is
only the effect component that's
being re rendered right so
it's not like for
example this use state one is not
being re rendered because React
is smart to see like okay the effect
had a state change, right?
Because I know data doesn't flow
up right cuz of one way data flow.
I can just rerender the effect component
and leave everything else as is.
That's a good question.
Yeah,
>> The effects are called a second
time does the first timer clear?
>> No, so
it's been called every second, right?
But I think I can see what
the person's asking is like,
what happens if there's overlap,
right that it runs again before cuz
another hook could change or
cause it to render again.
There's nothing here that would
clean up that code right,
there's nothing here that would prevent
it from running which means you could
definitely run into race conditions there.
In which case you just have to be like
more defensively coding to make sure that
your race conditions don't race,
is that how you say that I think so,
I'm sticking with it.
Yeah?
>> I do have
a bit of a tangential question since
we just mentioned race conditions.
I find maybe this is colored because
I'm JavaScript developers worked
in old JavaScript for a while too.
And maybe you haven't had
a lot of these updates.
But for example,
we use set time a lot in these examples.
And I'm curious to know a lot of
my work and a lot of problems come
by in like loading assets and having long
calls that take a while to resolve and
then dependent assets based on that.
It doesn't seem like that's
ever come up here, but so far,
obviously we're doing simple things.
In a general sense do you find do you use
like await async await a lot to deal with
those things or how does react So,
what tools or how would you approach
kinda timing things like that?
I'm sure.
>> I mean I think the you can kinda
distill that question down is like I have
to do a synchronous orchestration, right?
And there's several very
valid approaches to that.
If you have like very
complicated workflows,
we're gonna talk about Redux later,
that's actually where Redox really shines.
You can do things with Redox sagas
that make it really nice to visualize.
Do this, do this, do this maybe do this,
maybe do that, right.
That's is the use case of Redox,
that is if you need to do stuff like,
that if it's really just do a call,
wait get the answer do a second
call writing an async await function
is gonna do that just great.
Yeah, I think that that's I'm
satisfied with that answer.
>> I appreciate that.
>> Yes.
Any other questions?
It's good for
you to really understand state and effect.
Cuz those are by far
the two most used hooks
everything else is a pretty long tail.
Have you ever seen like the pattern of
usage with language where there's the word
that's used the most and then there's
these worthies the second most and
third most it's like this curve that
goes on to a really long tail and
it applies to way more things
than you think it should.
Definitely applies to hook right
there's like state here effect here.
Maybe reducer because there's
people that missed Redux.
And then there's like a long
tail after that right?
Or context maybe I don't
know one of those.
Yeah, that curve definitely applies here.
Yeah, Mark.
>> If I didn't use use effect,
but using set timeout,
how can I clear the timeout and
prevent a memory like.
>> You can't, Or
you shouldn't because that would
be creating a side effect in
your render function which is don't,
please God don't [LAUGH].
The point of use effect is to
contain side effects, right?
And if you're asked me is like how do I
contain a side effect without the thing
that contains side effects, right?
That's, you can't or
you shouldn't he probably could figure out
a way to do it and it would be a bad idea.
There's other functions we could
use here like layout effect
that technically would be
able to handle it, but
he would be bending the tool to
use it in the wrong way, right?
It'd be like using
a screwdriver as a hammer
>> Is it common to update the state and
use effect and also have that
state in the dependency array?
>> Yes so the question is is
here we're updating time right
we're using set time and
we should have here time like this.
That is a really good rule of
thumb here if you see your self
referencing either by setting it or
reading from almost always
is going to be a dependency
down here in your dependencies.
It would be the exception that
it would not be down there.
So there's a ES lint rule called the React
hooks rule put out it's an official
ES lint package from the React core team
and it actually enforces that you do that.
So actually,
if the ES lint rule would actually require
me to put in here set time as well.
Stop that, there we go set time.
Cuz technically if set time changed,
it would also fact that it won't because
it's a function and it wouldn't do that
but the ES lint rule would require you to
down here to put that yeah that's that's
a astute that's a good observation.